# Notes on writing well

**Working notes, by Michael Nielsen:** These are _rough_ notes.  I'm
 writing them to help me improve my polished writing, not as models of
 prose in themselves.

## Observations

**It's hard to write the truth:** When I say it's hard to write the
truth, it sounds as though I'm saying that I lie a lot, or I'm
accusing other writers of lying.  But that's not what I mean.  If your
writing has novelty, then early drafts will likely be, at best, rough
approximations to the truth.  Those drafts will contain sentences and
paragraphs which are the written equivalent of those conversational
fumbles where we finally burst out with "You know what I mean".
Unfortunately, when writing it's easy not to notice when we make such
fumbles, and to settle for writing which is a poor approximation to
the truth.  The only solution I know to this problem is to revise over
and over, asking repeatedly of each sentence whether it can be
_sharper_, and if we really, truly, _believe_ the sentence.

**Good writing is good psychology:** Advice on writing is sometimes
presented in a tough-sounding, apparently objective style.  "Avoid
adverbs".  "Avoid needless words".  Etc. Justifications for such rules
are either omitted entirely, or couched in generalities about what
makes good writing.  But good writing isn't an intrinsic property of
the text.  It's a quality of the relationship between reader and what
is written.  And so advice on writing is about how to change that
relationship.  Good writers build up a _theory_ of that relationship,
a psychology of reading.  The better a writer's theory of that
psychology, the better their writing.  Good writing is really an
exercise in applied psychology.

**Beware words that you wouldn't use while speaking:** Using such
words in your writing isn't always a mistake, but it must be done
consciously, and for good reasons.  Writers often use such words to
appear authoritative, writing in what they imagine is expert language.
Unfortunately, lacking practice with that language they're likely to
use it poorly, unless they are exceptionally careful.  This desire to
appear authoritative can easily become a self-serving agenda, not an
agenda in service to the reader. With that said, if you're confident
you're using the word in the reader's service, go for it!

**One purpose:** A good piece of writing has a single, sharp,
overriding purpose.  Every part of the writing --- even the
digressions! --- should serve that purpose.

A common pattern is to begin a piece with a problem or a mystery or a
promise.  Resolving the problem or mystery or fulfilling the promise
is what defines the purpose of the piece.  Of course, your writing may
take the reader on a journey, gradually refining (and perhaps
redefining) the purpose.  But it nonetheless remains with the reader
and the author.  "Destroy the One Ring" is our obsession in _The Lord
of the Rings_.  The problem confronted in _Where Do Good Ideas Come
From?_ needs no elaboration.  _The Language Instinct_ promises to
explore the idea that much of the structure of language is innate to
our brains, not learned.  Each book focuses relentlessly on its
purpose.

I'm not sure I really understand why clarity of purpose matters so
much to good writing.  Yet writing which violates it nearly always
suffers.  Lois Bujold begins one of her books with a mystery, which
she resolves partway through the book.  The book then changes to be
about something else. It's telling that I don't remember either the
title of the book, or more plot details.

Perhaps an explanation lies in the nature of our emotional bond to a
book.  That bond is formed early, and if changes too much, the bond is
severed.  The author may try to establish a new bond, but
we-the-reader become confused.  Are we supposed to commit again?  What
is the book really about?

There are famous examples which evade this rule.  I'm not sure what
Douglas Adams' books are about, but I enjoy them for the sheer
sentence-by-sentence pleasure.  Perhaps that _is_ what Adams' books
are about.  I'm also not sure what Robert Pirsig's _Zen and the Art of
Motorcycle Maintenance_ is about, but it's a terrific book.  Such
examples aside, most successful writing has a single overriding
purpose.

This observation matters because it's often tempting to let your
purpose expand and become vague.  Writing a piece about gardens?  Hey,
why not include that important related thought you had about
rainforests?  Now you have a piece that's sort of about gardens and
sort of about rainforests, and not really about anything.  There's
nothing really there for the reader to bond to.  This expansion in
purpose is done with the best of intentions --- you want to write
about all the good ideas that you have.  But it breaks the clarity of
your communication with the reader.  It's a type of _discursive
disease_.

Discursive disease is difficult to combat.  The only surefire solution
is to rewrite, culling and editing ruthlessly until you have a single
purpose.  But a partial solution is to make sure you always _know your
purpose_.  I'm currently experimenting with writing the purpose of
pieces I'm working on into the head of the file for that piece.  I'll
then review it each time I sit down to write.

This is not to say that the purpose should be fixed.  If you're
writing to discover then the purpose will evolve over time, and
perhaps even change radically.  That's part of why you're writing.
But your final piece should reflect only the purpose that you
discovered during the writing.  All else, no matter how good, must be
removed.  File it somewhere where you can find it again later, for use
in future writing projects.  When Aaron Sorkin wrote the television
movie _The American President_ he gathered far more material than he
could use in the final script.  He put the extra material aside, and
later it helped him write _The West Wing_.

A complicating factor is that sometimes you need _need_ to explore
beyond the boundaries of your current purpose.  You're writing for
purpose A, but your instinct tells you that you need to explore
subject B.  Unfortunately, you're not yet sure how subject B fits in.
If that's the case then you _must_ take time to explore, and to
understand how, if at all, subject B fits in, and whether you need to
revise your purpose.  This is emotionally difficult.  It creates
uncertainty, and you may feel as though your work on subject B is
wasted effort.  These doubts must be resisted.

**"What is your book (or essay) about?"** Connected to the last point.
  You _must_ have a compelling answer to this.  If you don't, then
  your book or essay almost certainly doesn't have a single overriding
  purpose.

## Titles

**A Brief History of Time (Hawking):** Amusing, in multiple ways: the
  self-reference of having a history of time; the self-reference that
  it's brief; and finally the fact that the title is a pretty darned
  literal description of the book.
  
**The Future of Ideas (Lessig):** I'm not sure whether this is a good
  title or not.  It's ambitious and provocative, a big-picture title.
  It almost forces the reader to confront the question: what is the
  future of ideas?  But it's huge scope also means that it's a vague
  title.  And, in the end, it's not quite what the book is about.  The
  book is really about the future of expression, i.e., the future of
  how ideas and culture are expressed.  This makes the title somewhat
  elusive, the kind where, after reading the book, you may not recall
  the title.

**The Society of Mind (Minsky):** What I like about this title is that
  it really is exactly what the book is about.  After you've read the
  book you won't have any difficulty recalling the title.  A problem
  with the title is that it's not really obvious to the prospective
  reader what it means.  It does, at least, sound pregnant with
  meaning, and it's also an idea that is relatively easy to explain.
  It might, perhaps, have been helped by a subtitle: "how the mind
  arises through many agents", or something in that vein.  (That's not
  a good subtitle, but something along those lines might have worked.)

**Juxtaposition:** Many titles juxtapose two words (or concepts) that
  are not usually together.  This is particularly effective when the
  juxtaposition is surprising, but in retrospect meaningful.  "The
  Selfish Gene" is, for example, more surprising than "The Future of
  Ideas".  "Future Shock" is an excellent juxtaposition. 


**Three types of titles:** (1) Books that describe a subject or field.
These titles name the subject or field, perhaps with a simple
modifier: *Introduction to algorithms*; *Principles of neuroscience*;
*Quantum Computation and Quantum Information*.  (2) Journalistic books
that are principally reporting.  These may follow the pattern of (1),
or perhaps have a quirkier title that reflects some aspect of the
subject or field under investigation.  *In the plex* is an example of
the quirky approach.  *Complexity* is an example that follows (1).
(3) Idea books, i.e., books which explore a new concept or propose a
theory.  Here, the title ideally names the central new concept or
theory.  *The Selfish Gene*.  *The Ingenuity Gap*.  *Everything is
Miscellaneous*.  *One the Origin of Species by Means of Natural
Selection*.  *Biology is Technology*.  Failing that, the title
describes the problem to be addressed: *The Trouble With Physics*.
*Reinventing Discovery*.

**Adjective-noun title forms:** A common form for the big idea in
  big-idea books.  _The Selfish Gene_.  *Free Culture* (free has a
  double meaning as a verb here).  *The Long Tail*.  *Collective
  Intelligence*.  *Global Brain*.  Hey, this can be turned into a fun
  mad libs game!  I'll now generate two lists, drawn from the books on
  the bookcase immediately beside me.  A few of these words aren't
  usually used as adjectives or nouns, but they are in the books
  titles I'm quoting, so I'll run with it.  I've taken the first
  twenty adjectives, and the last twenty nouns (i.e., they're being
  drawn from different books on my shelf):

> selfish, free, long, collective, global, public, parallel,
> distributed, critical, digital, big, open source, fab, economic,
> wiki, lifelong, information, administrative, artificial, formal

> principle, wikinomics, 2.0, surplus, smog, genius, optimist, mobs,
> bubble, intelligence, manifesto, culture, innovation, chronicles,
> crunchers, tail, University, brain, science, cyborg

These lists suggest many amusing or stimulating titles. Some I'd
certainly consider reading. Here are a few that tickled me: _The
Selfish Brain_.  _Administrative Genius_.  _The Lifelong
Optimist_. _The Free Cyborg_.  _The Distributed University_.  And they
suggest derivatives as well: _The Information Deficit_.  _A Manifesto
for Ignorance_.  And so on.  Not bad for ten minutes work.  It's also
notable that this process is easily scaled, and won't hit the point of
diminishing returns very quickly.  Spend ten times as long, get ten
times as many titles.

A cynic might say that all this proves is that our public intellectual
life is a narrow game.  I think that's wrong (though _The Narrow Game_
is a good title, hmm...)  Instead, I think the message is optimistic:
it's easy to generate good, novel ideas and questions!

**Noun-is-noun title forms:** _Everything bad is good for you_.
  _Biology is technology_. _Everything is illuminated_. _This is not a
  novel_. Again, acquires power through contrast in juxtaposition.  I
  love the title _Everything is illuminated_: it's simple, yet
  suggestive of so much.  While it doesn't produce quite as many hits
  as adjective-noun forms, it's still fun to play mad libs style.

## Opening sentences

**Is the sentence striking enough to make the reader want to read
  more?**

**Does the sentence start as late as possible?**

**When in trouble, quickly brainstorm ten or more opening sentences:**
  On occasion, one comes to a piece of writing with the perfect
  opening sentence.  Take the good fortune and run!  
  
  When one does not have that sentence, things become difficult.  It's
  tempting to compromise, and to accept a mediocre opening sentence.
  This is a bad mistake.  The opening sentence is the reader's
  introduction to your writing.  A mediocre opening is a statement that
  you're not going to make good use of their time.  It's also a
  turn-off for you as an author, making you less excited about your
  project.  By contrast, a good opening sentence establishes trust
  with the reader, and helps excite you about your own work.
    
  So what to do when you're having trouble finding a good opening
  sentence?
  
  In my opinion: just start brainstorming.  Quickly generate 10 or
  more opening sentences.  Don't worry about whether they're good or
  not.  Instead, try to connect with many different ways of thinking
  about the subject at hand.  Then, once you've got a stock of
  sentences, start to think analytically about the sentences.  What
  makes each one good or bad?  Can you improve any of the sentences?
  Do they suggest more ideas for sentences?
  
  This is a time-intensive process.  It can feel like wasted time --
  you might end up spending an hour (or even more!) on this.  But it's
  not wasted time.  The opening sentence is the beginning of your
  relationship with the reader, and with your own piece of work.  On
  both counts you want things to start off on the right foot.
  
  Many of these comments apply also to the title, subtitle, and to the
  opening paragraph.  Note that a great opening paragraph can, to a
  considerable extent, compensate for a less-than-great opening
  sentence.  Of course, it's better to have both.

### Opening sentence: "Fahrenheit 451" (Bradbury)

> It was a pleasure to burn.

A beautiful evocation of _feeling_.  It has both internal content --
the feeling a specific person gets -- as well as a dramatic visual.

### Opening sentence: "How Buildings Learn" (Brand)

> Year after year, the cultural elite of San Francisco is treated to
> the sight of its pre-eminent ladies, resplendently gowned, lined up
> in public waiting to pee.

A terrific opening.  The observation is striking, true, interesting,
funny, and, it turns out, a good introduction to the topic at hand.  

I especially like the humorous contrast.  Brand starts with lofty
language: "cultural elite", "resplendently gowned", etc.  But then we
have the crass "waiting to pee".  If you toned down the lofty
language, or toned up the crass language, the sentence would not be
nearly as funny.  Furthermore, while the observation would remain
true, it would be a less interesting truth.

### Opening sentence: "The Selfish Gene" (Dawkins)

> Intelligent life on a planet comes of age when it first works out
> the reason for its own existence

It's a provocative assertion.  Possibly wrong, certainly contentious.
But interesting, in a let's-stay-up-talking-to-3am kind of way, a
kicker of a conversation starter.  The phrase "on a planet" could
arguably be omitted.  It might be better to say something like: "An
intelligent species comes of age when...".

### Opening sentence: "Neuromancer" (Gibson)

> The sky above the port was the color of television, tuned to a dead
> channel.

Gibson is drawing our attention to a place.  And what a wonderful
evocation of place it is!  We can see half the scene.  I worry that
it's a bit too clever: prose drawing attention to itself.  That can
perhaps only be determined by what follows.

"Dead channel", incidentally, evokes the macabre.  It says subtly that
"this is not a good place".  So the sentence works both literally, and
by indirect meaning.

### Opening sentence: "How to do what you love" (Graham)

> To do something well you have to like it.

A simple assertion about reality.  It has power because: (a) if true,
it has profound consequences for how we live; (b) it's almost but not
quite true (creating tension); and especially (c) many of us are in
the uncomfortable position of both believing it's largely correct, but
not always acting on it.

The result is that there's a lot immediately on the line, and
considerable tension in the air.  Graham has started with the kind of
near-truism that we _should_ think about and act upon, but often
don't, because we're made uncomfortable by the gap between the truth
of the assertion and the reality of our lives.

### Opening sentence: "What Technology Wants" (Kelly)

> For most of my life I owned very little.

Probably a surprise for most readers.  Kelly is the author of books on
technology -- not usually the kind of person we think of as owning
little.  So the surprise invites us in.  Also, many of us have a
complicated relationship to what we own, so it promises to provide an
unusual perspective on a topic of broad interest.

### Opening sentence: "A Brief History of Time" (Hawking)

> A well-known scientist (some say it was Bertrand Russell) once gave
> a public lecture on astronomy.

This is scene-setting, an introduction to a story.  It has the
advantage that the tone is light.  The "some say it was Bertrand
Russell" even makes the point that it is determinedly light and
informal!

### Opening sentence: "The Language Instinct" (Pinker)

> As you are reading these words, you are taking part in one of the
> wonders of the natural world.

A beautiful observation, reminding us of the extraordinary in everyday
life.

### Opening sentence: "Cosmos" (Sagan)

> In ancient times, in everyday speech and custom, the most mundane
> happenings were connected with the grandest cosmic events.

This sentence describes a striking phenomenon.  But it loses something
because it leaves vague exactly what is being connected to what.

### Opening sentence: "A Planet of Viruses" (Zimmer)

> Fifty miles southeast of the Mexican city of Chihuahua is a dry,
> bare mountain range called Sierra de Naica.

# Danger words

**Interesting:** A bad tic is to announce interestingness.  This is a
  tic to which many academics and ex-academics (including myself) are
  susceptible:

> "It's interesting to consider..."  

> "An interesting example..."

There are several problem with these common uses of "interesting".
First, you're instructing the reader how they should feel, when you
should instead be making them feel that way by your _interesting_
prose.  Second, these uses are vague.  What exactly is the interesting
aspect of the subjects under discussion?

The first example above can be rewritten as
"Consider...". "Interesting" can be elided completely from the second
example.

The problem with "interesting" is when it's used because you lack
confidence.  It's announcing "hey, this next topic might sound boring,
but I promise you, it's interesting".  It subtly signals the opposite.
It's telling the reader that the subject sounds boring.  The solution
is to _make_ it interesting, right from the start.  Often, this means
deleting your sentence about how interesting the topic to come is, and
instead just getting on with it.  But make damn sure your discussion
is interesting!

**Quite:** The second-worst of the adverbs.  Much of what is said
  below about "very" applies also to "quite", with obvious changes.

**Very:** The worst of the adverbs.  Many uses of "very" can be
  omitted.  It is often used to intensify descriptions:
  
> He was a very important person.

> She looked very angry.

> Jake would very much like to eat lunch.

Unfortunately, "very" is so generic that any such gains in intensity
are often lost due to the dilution caused by using an extra word.
It's rarely worth the tradeoff.  The best that can be said is that if
used _very_ sparingly, the rareness of the occurrence may serve as a
sign to the reader that the writer means business.

In the first two sentences above the word "very" can be omitted with
little loss.  If "very" is essential to the sentence, then its work
should be done by the surrounding context.  Show us his great
importance; show her great anger.  Merely using "very" will not
convince us!

The third sentence is more complex.  Omission is unsatisfactory:

> Jake would like to eat lunch.

Something is lost here, since the intensity in "very much" is _very
much_ the point of the original sentence.  Unfortunately, "very much"
remains weak due to its generic nature.  It's better to replace the
entire construction with something specific:

> Jake was ravenous for lunch.

There are times when "very" can be used well.  Here's an acceptable
use, in dialogue:

> "Was she angry?"
>
> "Very"

In this example "very" is being used with a specific purpose, not as a
generic intensifer.  It works well because it makes its point with
such economy.  In general, "very" is okay when being used for a
specific purpose, not as a generic intensifier.

# Structure

**Is scientific publishing about to be disrupted:** This is an essay I
wrote in 2009.  In outline, the opening four paragraphs of this essay
do the following: (1) tells the story of Kongo Gumi, a 1400 year old
company that had gone bankrupt shortly before I wrote the essay; (2)
poses the question: "Why do big companies fail?", with several
examples; (3) recaps the standard explanations: stupidity or
malevolence; (4) explains what my essay does: proposes a different
(and scarier) explanation, and explains how it relates to scientific
publishing.
  
Abstracting further, this structure tells a micro-story that leads one
to ask a big, broad question.  It then explains the standard answer to
that question, and that the point of the essay is to offer an
alternate answer, and to illustrate it by an application.  It's likely
a good opening structure whenever you're dealing with a big question
with a standard answer and your point is to explain an alternate
answer.
  
# On Classic Style

Notes on classic writing style, as explained in Francis-Noel Thomas
and Mark Turner's book <a
href="http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0691147434/ref=as_li_tf_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=michaniels-20&linkCode=as2&camp=1789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0691147434">Clear
and Simple as the Truth</a><img
src="http://www.assoc-amazon.com/e/ir?t=michaniels-20&l=as2&o=1&a=0691147434"
width="1" height="1" border="0" alt="" style="border:none !important;
margin:0px !important;" />.

**Beware classic style if you've not yet mastered a subject:**
Sometimes, you wish to write about a subject, even though you haven't
yet mastered that subject.  It is difficult to write on such a subject
in classic style, because the assumptions of classic style very nearly
imply mastery.  It is easier to instead slip occasionally into a
personal style, explaining your exploration of the subject, and the
limits of your knowledge.  In such cases it may work to use a hybrid
style, in which you alternate the personal with the classic.  Feynman
occasionally uses this style, either to explain his own thinking, or
to explain the hypothetical thinking of others.


